README.md, before:

# SN-X Simulator

## Overview

SN-X Simulator is a Python toolchain (assembler, static analyzer, and simulator) for the **SN/X architecture**, a 16-bit educational RISC processor designed by **Naohiko Shimizu**.

This document includes a concise technical summary of the SN/X architecture and this Python implementation.

## Requirements

- Python 3.11 or higher
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)

## Installation

1. Install uv (if not already installed)
   ```bash
   pip install uv
   ```
2. Create and activate a virtual environment
   ```bash
   uv venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```
3. Install project dependencies
   ```bash
   uv pip install -e .
   ```

## Running the Sample Program

Run the main script to run static analysis and, if there are no errors, execute a sample assembly program and view the trace table:
```bash
uv run python main.py
```

The script will first print the static analysis result (errors and warnings). If any errors are reported, execution is aborted before the simulator runs.

## Static Analysis and Diagnostics

The SN-X toolchain performs several static checks before executing a program, similar in spirit to `go build` or `cargo check`:

- **Syntax and basic semantics**: unknown instructions, invalid operand counts/types, register index bounds, undefined or duplicate labels.
- **Memory bounds checking**: absolute addresses (`base == $0`) that exceed `mem_size` are flagged as errors (code `M001`).
- **Control-flow analysis (CFG)**: builds a control-flow graph to identify unreachable code and certain obvious infinite loops (regions of code with no path to `HLT`).
- **Dataflow analysis**: tracks initialization state of registers/memory and return-address usage to detect:
  - reads from uninitialized or potentially uninitialized memory,
  - return jumps that do not use a valid return address.

These checks are integrated into the compiler and simulator:

- `compile_program(source: str, *, reg_count: int = DEFAULT_REG_COUNT, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, run_static_checks: bool = True)`
  - parses and analyzes the source program,
  - runs static analysis by default,
  - returns a `CompileResult` containing:
    - `program`: high-level AST (`Program`) or `None` on failure,
    - `ir`: lowered `IRProgram` or `None` if analysis failed,
    - `diagnostics`: list of all errors and warnings,
    - `reg_count`: the register count used for static analysis (default: 4),
    - `mem_size`: the memory size used for static analysis (default: 2^16),
    - `cfg`: the control-flow graph (when static checks are enabled),
    - `dataflow`: dataflow analysis result (when static checks are enabled).
  - helper methods:
    - `has_errors()` / `has_warnings()`
    - `format_diagnostics()` to pretty-print diagnostics.

- Default constants are defined in `snx/constants.py`:
  - `DEFAULT_REG_COUNT = 4`
  - `DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE = 2 ** 16` (65536 words, matching full SN/X architecture)

Example: running static checks from Python without executing the simulator:

```python
from snx import compile_program

source = """
main:
    LDA $3, 64($0)
    LDA $1, 3($0)
    BAL $2, foo
    HLT
foo:
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source)

print(result.format_diagnostics())
if result.has_errors():
    raise SystemExit(1)
```

- `SNXSimulator.from_compile_result(result: CompileResult, *, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, trace_callback=None, input_fn=None, output_fn=None)`
  - creates a simulator from an existing `CompileResult`,
  - raises `ValueError` if the result contains errors or has no IR,
  - uses `result.reg_count` to configure the simulator's register count.

- `SNXSimulator.from_source(source: str, *, reg_count: int = DEFAULT_REG_COUNT, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, trace_callback=None, input_fn=None, output_fn=None)`
  - convenience method that internally calls `compile_program` then `from_compile_result`,
  - raises `ValueError` if compilation or static analysis reports any errors.

### Recommended Pattern: Compile Once, Reuse IR

When you want to display diagnostics before running the simulator, use `compile_program` followed by `from_compile_result` to avoid compiling twice:

```python
from snx import compile_program, SNXSimulator

source = """
main:
    LDA $1, 5($0)
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source)
print(result.format_diagnostics())

if result.has_errors():
    raise SystemExit(1)

sim = SNXSimulator.from_compile_result(result)
sim.run()
print(f"Final registers: {sim.regs}")
```

## SN/X Architecture Overview

SN/X (Simple 16-bit Non-Pipeline Processor) is a strictly 16-bit RISC processor designed for educational purposes.

### Key Specifications

- **Designer:** Naohiko Shimizu
- **Data Width:** 16-bit
- **Address Space:** 16-bit (2^16 words) for both Instruction Memory (IMEM) and Data Memory (DMEM)
- **Addressing:** Word addressing (address increment of 1 = 16-bit move)
- **Registers:** 4 General Purpose Registers (16-bit): `$0`, `$1`, `$2`, `$3`
  - **Note:** `$0` can store values like any other register, but when used as a **base register** in memory addressing (e.g., `LD $1, 10($0)`), it is treated as constant `0`. This means `Imm($0)` becomes an absolute address.
- **Pipeline:** Non-pipelined (sequential execution)
- **PC:** 16-bit Program Counter (not directly accessible by programmer)

### Instruction Formats

All instructions are 16-bit fixed length.

| Type | Assembly | Bit Layout (15→0) |
|------|----------|-------------------|
| **R** | `OP R1, R2, R3` | `OP(4) \| Src1(2) \| Src2(2) \| Dest(2) \| Unused(6)` |
| **R1** | `OP R1, R2` | `OP(4) \| Src(2) \| Unused(2) \| Dest(2) \| Unused(6)` |
| **R0** | `OP` | `OP(4) \| Unused(12)` |
| **I** | `OP R1, Imm(R2)` | `OP(4) \| Dest(2) \| Base(2) \| Imm(8)` |

### Full Instruction Set

| Opcode | Mnemonic | Type | Operation |
|:------:|:---------|:----:|:----------|
| `0x0` | **ADD** | R | `R1 = R2 + R3` |
| `0x1` | **AND** | R | `R1 = R2 & R3` |
| `0x2` | **SUB** | R | `R1 = R2 - R3` |
| `0x3` | **SLT** | R | `R1 = (R2 < R3) ? 1 : 0` |
| `0x4` | **NOT** | R1 | `R1 = ~R2` |
| `0x6` | **SR** | R1 | `R1 = R2 >> 1` |
| `0x7` | **HLT** | R0 | Halt processor |
| `0x8` | **LD** | I | `R1 = MEM[Base + Imm]` |
| `0x9` | **ST** | I | `MEM[Base + Imm] = R1` |
| `0xA` | **LDA** | I | `R1 = Base + Imm` (load address / immediate) |
| `0xC` | **IN** | I | `R1 = Input_Port` |
| `0xD` | **OUT** | I | `Output_Port = R1` |
| `0xE` | **BZ** | I | `if (R1 == 0) PC = Target` (branch if zero) |
| `0xF` | **BAL** | I | `R1 = PC + 1; PC = Target` (branch and link) |

**Branch Instructions:**
- **BZ:** Branches to target label if the condition register equals zero.
- **BAL:** Saves return address (`PC + 1`) into link register, then jumps to target. Used for function calls; return is typically `BAL $x, 0($link_reg)`.

#### Branch Encoding and Program Length Limit

The original snxasm assembler encodes label-based branches (BZ, BAL) by directly adding the target label's PC value to the instruction word **without masking**. Since the opcode occupies bits 15–12 and the register field occupies bits 11–10, the target PC must fit within the lower 10 bits (bits 9–0) to avoid corrupting the instruction encoding.

This means:
- **Programs must be fewer than 1024 instructions** for branch encoding to work correctly.
- This Python implementation follows the same encoding scheme for compatibility with snxasm-generated binaries.

### Simulator Implementation Status

This simulator implements the **complete SN/X instruction set**:

`ADD`, `AND`, `SUB`, `SLT`, `NOT`, `SR`, `HLT`, `LD`, `ST`, `LDA`, `IN`, `OUT`, `BZ`, `BAL`

### 16-bit Word Model

All register and memory values are strictly 16-bit words (0x0000–0xFFFF):
- Arithmetic operations wrap around on overflow/underflow.
- `SLT` compares values as signed 16-bit integers (two's complement).
- Effective addresses are computed as 16-bit values.

### I/O Model

The simulator supports `IN` and `OUT` instructions via callback functions:

```python
from snx import SNXSimulator

def my_input() -> int:
    return int(input("Enter value: "))

def my_output(value: int) -> None:
    print(f"Output: {value}")

sim = SNXSimulator.from_source(source, input_fn=my_input, output_fn=my_output)
sim.run()

print(sim.get_output_buffer())
```

- **IN:** Reads a 16-bit value from `input_fn()`. Returns 0 if no callback is set.
- **OUT:** Writes a 16-bit value via `output_fn()`. Values are also stored in an internal buffer accessible via `get_output_buffer()`.

### Memory in This Simulator

- **Architecture spec:** 2^16 words each for IMEM and DMEM.
- **Simulator default:** 2^16 words (65536) data memory, matching the full SN/X architecture.
- **Configurable:** Use `mem_size` parameter to reduce memory size for testing or constrained environments.

#### Reduced Memory Mode

When `mem_size < 2^16`, the simulator operates in "reduced memory mode":

- **Static analysis:** For `LD`/`ST` with absolute addresses (`base == $0`) that exceed `mem_size`, an error is flagged at compile time (error code `M001`). Note: `LDA` is not checked since it only computes an address without accessing memory.
- **Runtime behavior:**
  - **LD:** Reading from an out-of-bounds address returns 0.
  - **ST:** Writing to an out-of-bounds address is silently ignored (no-op).

Example with reduced memory (static error):

```python
from snx import compile_program

source = """
main:
    LD $1, 1000($0)  ; Error: address 1000 exceeds mem_size=128
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source, mem_size=128)
print(result.format_diagnostics())  # Shows M001 error
```

#### OOB Callback (Runtime Hook)

For dynamic addresses (where `base != $0`), out-of-bounds access cannot be detected at compile time. You can use the `oob_callback` parameter to receive notifications when OOB access occurs at runtime:

```python
from snx import SNXSimulator

def log_oob(kind, addr, pc, inst_text, mem_size):
    print(f"[OOB] {kind} at addr={addr} (pc={pc}): {inst_text}")

source = """
main:
    LDA $1, 200($0)   ; $1 = 200 (no OOB check for LDA)
    LD $2, 0($1)      ; Runtime OOB: addr=200 > mem_size=128
    HLT
"""

sim = SNXSimulator.from_source(
    source,
    mem_size=128,
    oob_callback=log_oob,
)
sim.run()
# Output: [OOB] load at addr=200 (pc=1): LD $2, 0($1)
```

**Callback signature:**
```python
def oob_callback(
    kind: str,      # "load" or "store"
    addr: int,      # Effective address (16-bit masked)
    pc: int,        # Program counter of the instruction
    inst_text: str, # Original assembly text
    mem_size: int,  # Current memory size
) -> None: ...
```

**Behavior:**
- If `oob_callback` is `None` (default), OOB access is handled silently (LD returns 0, ST is no-op).
- If `oob_callback` is set, it is called before the default behavior.
- If the callback raises an exception, the simulator stops immediately.

### Trace Output

Each simulation step outputs PC, instruction text, and register state in a table format.

## SN/X Assembly Syntax

This section defines the syntax of the SN/X assembly language.

### Informal Overview

An SN/X assembly program consists of lines. Each line may contain:
- An optional **label definition** (an identifier followed by `:`)
- An optional **instruction** (a mnemonic followed by operands)
- An optional **comment** (starting with `;` and extending to the end of the line)

Empty lines and comment-only lines are allowed.

### Lexical Grammar

The lexer splits the input into the following token kinds:

| Token Kind | Description                                      | Examples            |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| IDENT      | Identifiers for labels and mnemonics             | `main`, `LDA`, `foo`|
| NUMBER     | Signed decimal integers                          | `42`, `-3`, `+10`   |
| REGISTER   | Register names (`$` followed by digits)          | `$0`, `$2`, `$3`    |
| COMMA      | `,`                                              |                     |
| COLON      | `:`                                              |                     |
| LPAREN     | `(`                                              |                     |
| RPAREN     | `)`                                              |                     |
| EOL        | End-of-line marker (produced for each newline)   |                     |
| EOF        | End-of-file marker                               |                     |

Comments start with `;` and continue to the end of the line. They are discarded by the lexer.

In EBNF notation:

```ebnf
identifier  = letter , { letter | digit | "_" } ;
number      = [ "+" | "-" ] , digit , { digit } ;
register    = "$" , digit , { digit } ;

letter      = "A".."Z" | "a".."z" ;
digit       = "0".."9" ;
```

Identifiers and mnemonics are case-insensitive; they are normalized to uppercase internally.

### Concrete Syntax Grammar (BNF / CFG)

The following context-free grammar (CFG), written in BNF, defines the concrete syntax of the SN/X assembly language:

```bnf
<program>           ::= <line>* <eof>

<line>              ::= [<label-def>] [<instruction>] <eol>

<label-def>         ::= <identifier> ":"

<instruction>       ::= <mnemonic> [<operand-list>]

<mnemonic>          ::= <identifier>

<operand-list>      ::= <operand> ("," <operand>)*

<operand>           ::= <register-operand>
                      | <address-operand>
                      | <label-ref-operand>

<register-operand>  ::= REGISTER

<address-operand>   ::= NUMBER "(" REGISTER ")"
                      | NUMBER

<label-ref-operand> ::= <identifier>

<eol>               ::= EOL | <eof>
<eof>               ::= EOF
```

**Notes:**
- When `<address-operand>` is written as just `NUMBER` (without parentheses), the base register defaults to `$0`.
- `<mnemonic>` is matched against the supported opcodes (`ADD`, `AND`, `SUB`, `SLT`, `NOT`, `SR`, `HLT`, `LD`, `ST`, `LDA`, `IN`, `OUT`, `BZ`, `BAL`). Unknown mnemonics produce a diagnostic error.
- Labels and mnemonics are case-insensitive.

### Operand Types by Instruction

| Instruction | Operand 1       | Operand 2                  | Operand 3       |
|-------------|-----------------|----------------------------|-----------------|
| ADD         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| AND         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| SUB         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| SLT         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| NOT         | Register        | Register                   |                 |
| SR          | Register        | Register                   |                 |
| HLT         |                 |                            |                 |
| LD          | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| ST          | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| LDA         | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| IN          | Register        |                            |                 |
| OUT         | Register        |                            |                 |
| BZ          | Register        | Label                      |                 |
| BAL         | Register        | Label or Address           |                 |

Commit message:

Align immediate semantics with snxasm and add 8-bit warning
- Add 8-bit immediate utilities (IMM8_MASK, imm8, signed8, normalize_imm8) in snx.word
- Use normalize_imm8 in SNXSimulator effective address calculation to match snxasm/CPU behavior
- Update Analyzer memory bounds check and immediate range warning to use normalized 8-bit values
- Adjust dataflow stack/slot tracking to respect 8-bit normalized offsets
- Import/export new word and encoding helpers from snx package
- Document 8-bit immediate encoding, sign-extension, and I001 warning semantics in README

README.md, after:

# SN-X Simulator

## Overview

SN-X Simulator is a Python toolchain (assembler, static analyzer, and simulator) for the **SN/X architecture**, a 16-bit educational RISC processor designed by **Naohiko Shimizu**.

This document includes a concise technical summary of the SN/X architecture and this Python implementation.

## Requirements

- Python 3.11 or higher
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)

## Installation

1. Install uv (if not already installed)
   ```bash
   pip install uv
   ```
2. Create and activate a virtual environment
   ```bash
   uv venv
   source .venv/bin/activate
   ```
3. Install project dependencies
   ```bash
   uv pip install -e .
   ```

## Running the Sample Program

Run the main script to run static analysis and, if there are no errors, execute a sample assembly program and view the trace table:
```bash
uv run python main.py
```

The script will first print the static analysis result (errors and warnings). If any errors are reported, execution is aborted before the simulator runs.

## Static Analysis and Diagnostics

The SN-X toolchain performs several static checks before executing a program, similar in spirit to `go build` or `cargo check`:

- **Syntax and basic semantics**: unknown instructions, invalid operand counts/types, register index bounds, undefined or duplicate labels.
- **Memory bounds checking**: absolute addresses (`base == $0`) that exceed `mem_size` are flagged as errors (code `M001`).
- **Control-flow analysis (CFG)**: builds a control-flow graph to identify unreachable code and certain obvious infinite loops (regions of code with no path to `HLT`).
- **Dataflow analysis**: tracks initialization state of registers/memory and return-address usage to detect:
  - reads from uninitialized or potentially uninitialized memory,
  - return jumps that do not use a valid return address.

These checks are integrated into the compiler and simulator:

- `compile_program(source: str, *, reg_count: int = DEFAULT_REG_COUNT, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, run_static_checks: bool = True)`
  - parses and analyzes the source program,
  - runs static analysis by default,
  - returns a `CompileResult` containing:
    - `program`: high-level AST (`Program`) or `None` on failure,
    - `ir`: lowered `IRProgram` or `None` if analysis failed,
    - `diagnostics`: list of all errors and warnings,
    - `reg_count`: the register count used for static analysis (default: 4),
    - `mem_size`: the memory size used for static analysis (default: 2^16),
    - `cfg`: the control-flow graph (when static checks are enabled),
    - `dataflow`: dataflow analysis result (when static checks are enabled).
  - helper methods:
    - `has_errors()` / `has_warnings()`
    - `format_diagnostics()` to pretty-print diagnostics.

- Default constants are defined in `snx/constants.py`:
  - `DEFAULT_REG_COUNT = 4`
  - `DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE = 2 ** 16` (65536 words, matching full SN/X architecture)

Example: running static checks from Python without executing the simulator:

```python
from snx import compile_program

source = """
main:
    LDA $3, 64($0)
    LDA $1, 3($0)
    BAL $2, foo
    HLT
foo:
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source)

print(result.format_diagnostics())
if result.has_errors():
    raise SystemExit(1)
```

- `SNXSimulator.from_compile_result(result: CompileResult, *, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, trace_callback=None, input_fn=None, output_fn=None)`
  - creates a simulator from an existing `CompileResult`,
  - raises `ValueError` if the result contains errors or has no IR,
  - uses `result.reg_count` to configure the simulator's register count.

- `SNXSimulator.from_source(source: str, *, reg_count: int = DEFAULT_REG_COUNT, mem_size: int = DEFAULT_MEM_SIZE, trace_callback=None, input_fn=None, output_fn=None)`
  - convenience method that internally calls `compile_program` then `from_compile_result`,
  - raises `ValueError` if compilation or static analysis reports any errors.

### Recommended Pattern: Compile Once, Reuse IR

When you want to display diagnostics before running the simulator, use `compile_program` followed by `from_compile_result` to avoid compiling twice:

```python
from snx import compile_program, SNXSimulator

source = """
main:
    LDA $1, 5($0)
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source)
print(result.format_diagnostics())

if result.has_errors():
    raise SystemExit(1)

sim = SNXSimulator.from_compile_result(result)
sim.run()
print(f"Final registers: {sim.regs}")
```

## SN/X Architecture Overview

SN/X (Simple 16-bit Non-Pipeline Processor) is a strictly 16-bit RISC processor designed for educational purposes.

### Key Specifications

- **Designer:** Naohiko Shimizu
- **Data Width:** 16-bit
- **Address Space:** 16-bit (2^16 words) for both Instruction Memory (IMEM) and Data Memory (DMEM)
- **Addressing:** Word addressing (address increment of 1 = 16-bit move)
- **Registers:** 4 General Purpose Registers (16-bit): `$0`, `$1`, `$2`, `$3`
  - **Note:** `$0` can store values like any other register, but when used as a **base register** in memory addressing (e.g., `LD $1, 10($0)`), it is treated as constant `0`. This means `Imm($0)` becomes an absolute address.
- **Pipeline:** Non-pipelined (sequential execution)
- **PC:** 16-bit Program Counter (not directly accessible by programmer)

### Instruction Formats

All instructions are 16-bit fixed length.

| Type | Assembly | Bit Layout (15→0) |
|------|----------|-------------------|
| **R** | `OP R1, R2, R3` | `OP(4) \| Src1(2) \| Src2(2) \| Dest(2) \| Unused(6)` |
| **R1** | `OP R1, R2` | `OP(4) \| Src(2) \| Unused(2) \| Dest(2) \| Unused(6)` |
| **R0** | `OP` | `OP(4) \| Unused(12)` |
| **I** | `OP R1, Imm(R2)` | `OP(4) \| Dest(2) \| Base(2) \| Imm(8)` |

#### 8-bit Immediate Encoding and Interpretation

For I-type instructions (LD, ST, LDA, BAL with address operand), the immediate/offset field is **8 bits wide**. This implementation follows the original snxasm assembler behavior exactly:

- **Encoding:** The immediate value is masked to 8 bits (`imm & 0xFF`) during binary encoding.
- **Execution:** The 8-bit value is **sign-extended** to 16 bits before being added to the base register.
  - Values 0x00–0x7F (0–127) are interpreted as positive.
  - Values 0x80–0xFF (128–255) are interpreted as negative (-128 to -1).

This means the effective range for immediate values is **-128 to 127**. If a source value falls outside this range, it will be truncated and sign-extended, resulting in a different effective value. The static analyzer issues warning **I001** when this occurs.

**Example:**
```asm
LDA $1, 300($0)   ; Source value: 300
                  ; Encoded as: 300 & 0xFF = 0x2C (44)
                  ; Interpreted as: 44 (positive, since 0x2C < 0x80)
                  ; Warning I001: "Immediate value 300 will be encoded as 8-bit and interpreted as 44 (0x2C)"

LDA $1, -2($3)    ; Source value: -2
                  ; Encoded as: -2 & 0xFF = 0xFE (254)
                  ; Interpreted as: -2 (sign-extended, since 0xFE >= 0x80)
                  ; No warning (value unchanged after normalization)
```

### Full Instruction Set

| Opcode | Mnemonic | Type | Operation |
|:------:|:---------|:----:|:----------|
| `0x0` | **ADD** | R | `R1 = R2 + R3` |
| `0x1` | **AND** | R | `R1 = R2 & R3` |
| `0x2` | **SUB** | R | `R1 = R2 - R3` |
| `0x3` | **SLT** | R | `R1 = (R2 < R3) ? 1 : 0` |
| `0x4` | **NOT** | R1 | `R1 = ~R2` |
| `0x6` | **SR** | R1 | `R1 = R2 >> 1` |
| `0x7` | **HLT** | R0 | Halt processor |
| `0x8` | **LD** | I | `R1 = MEM[Base + Imm]` |
| `0x9` | **ST** | I | `MEM[Base + Imm] = R1` |
| `0xA` | **LDA** | I | `R1 = Base + Imm` (load address / immediate) |
| `0xC` | **IN** | I | `R1 = Input_Port` |
| `0xD` | **OUT** | I | `Output_Port = R1` |
| `0xE` | **BZ** | I | `if (R1 == 0) PC = Target` (branch if zero) |
| `0xF` | **BAL** | I | `R1 = PC + 1; PC = Target` (branch and link) |

**Branch Instructions:**
- **BZ:** Branches to target label if the condition register equals zero.
- **BAL:** Saves return address (`PC + 1`) into link register, then jumps to target. Used for function calls; return is typically `BAL $x, 0($link_reg)`.

#### Branch Encoding and Program Length Limit

The original snxasm assembler encodes label-based branches (BZ, BAL) by directly adding the target label's PC value to the instruction word **without masking**. Since the opcode occupies bits 15–12 and the register field occupies bits 11–10, the target PC must fit within the lower 10 bits (bits 9–0) to avoid corrupting the instruction encoding.

This means:
- **Programs must be fewer than 1024 instructions** for branch encoding to work correctly.
- This Python implementation follows the same encoding scheme for compatibility with snxasm-generated binaries.

### Simulator Implementation Status

This simulator implements the **complete SN/X instruction set**:

`ADD`, `AND`, `SUB`, `SLT`, `NOT`, `SR`, `HLT`, `LD`, `ST`, `LDA`, `IN`, `OUT`, `BZ`, `BAL`

### 16-bit Word Model

All register and memory values are strictly 16-bit words (0x0000–0xFFFF):
- Arithmetic operations wrap around on overflow/underflow.
- `SLT` compares values as signed 16-bit integers (two's complement).
- Effective addresses are computed as 16-bit values.

### I/O Model

The simulator supports `IN` and `OUT` instructions via callback functions:

```python
from snx import SNXSimulator

def my_input() -> int:
    return int(input("Enter value: "))

def my_output(value: int) -> None:
    print(f"Output: {value}")

sim = SNXSimulator.from_source(source, input_fn=my_input, output_fn=my_output)
sim.run()

print(sim.get_output_buffer())
```

- **IN:** Reads a 16-bit value from `input_fn()`. Returns 0 if no callback is set.
- **OUT:** Writes a 16-bit value via `output_fn()`. Values are also stored in an internal buffer accessible via `get_output_buffer()`.

### Memory in This Simulator

- **Architecture spec:** 2^16 words each for IMEM and DMEM.
- **Simulator default:** 2^16 words (65536) data memory, matching the full SN/X architecture.
- **Configurable:** Use `mem_size` parameter to reduce memory size for testing or constrained environments.

#### Reduced Memory Mode

When `mem_size < 2^16`, the simulator operates in "reduced memory mode":

- **Static analysis:** For `LD`/`ST` with absolute addresses (`base == $0`) that exceed `mem_size`, an error is flagged at compile time (error code `M001`). Note: `LDA` is not checked since it only computes an address without accessing memory.
- **Runtime behavior:**
  - **LD:** Reading from an out-of-bounds address returns 0.
  - **ST:** Writing to an out-of-bounds address is silently ignored (no-op).

Example with reduced memory (static error):

```python
from snx import compile_program

source = """
main:
    LD $1, 1000($0)  ; Error: address 1000 exceeds mem_size=128
    HLT
"""

result = compile_program(source, mem_size=128)
print(result.format_diagnostics())  # Shows M001 error
```

#### OOB Callback (Runtime Hook)

For dynamic addresses (where `base != $0`), out-of-bounds access cannot be detected at compile time. You can use the `oob_callback` parameter to receive notifications when OOB access occurs at runtime:

```python
from snx import SNXSimulator

def log_oob(kind, addr, pc, inst_text, mem_size):
    print(f"[OOB] {kind} at addr={addr} (pc={pc}): {inst_text}")

source = """
main:
    LDA $1, 200($0)   ; $1 = 200 (no OOB check for LDA)
    LD $2, 0($1)      ; Runtime OOB: addr=200 > mem_size=128
    HLT
"""

sim = SNXSimulator.from_source(
    source,
    mem_size=128,
    oob_callback=log_oob,
)
sim.run()
# Output: [OOB] load at addr=200 (pc=1): LD $2, 0($1)
```

**Callback signature:**
```python
def oob_callback(
    kind: str,      # "load" or "store"
    addr: int,      # Effective address (16-bit masked)
    pc: int,        # Program counter of the instruction
    inst_text: str, # Original assembly text
    mem_size: int,  # Current memory size
) -> None: ...
```

**Behavior:**
- If `oob_callback` is `None` (default), OOB access is handled silently (LD returns 0, ST is no-op).
- If `oob_callback` is set, it is called before the default behavior.
- If the callback raises an exception, the simulator stops immediately.

### Trace Output

Each simulation step outputs PC, instruction text, and register state in a table format.

## SN/X Assembly Syntax

This section defines the syntax of the SN/X assembly language.

### Informal Overview

An SN/X assembly program consists of lines. Each line may contain:
- An optional **label definition** (an identifier followed by `:`)
- An optional **instruction** (a mnemonic followed by operands)
- An optional **comment** (starting with `;` and extending to the end of the line)

Empty lines and comment-only lines are allowed.

### Lexical Grammar

The lexer splits the input into the following token kinds:

| Token Kind | Description                                      | Examples            |
|------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| IDENT      | Identifiers for labels and mnemonics             | `main`, `LDA`, `foo`|
| NUMBER     | Signed decimal integers                          | `42`, `-3`, `+10`   |
| REGISTER   | Register names (`$` followed by digits)          | `$0`, `$2`, `$3`    |
| COMMA      | `,`                                              |                     |
| COLON      | `:`                                              |                     |
| LPAREN     | `(`                                              |                     |
| RPAREN     | `)`                                              |                     |
| EOL        | End-of-line marker (produced for each newline)   |                     |
| EOF        | End-of-file marker                               |                     |

Comments start with `;` and continue to the end of the line. They are discarded by the lexer.

In EBNF notation:

```ebnf
identifier  = letter , { letter | digit | "_" } ;
number      = [ "+" | "-" ] , digit , { digit } ;
register    = "$" , digit , { digit } ;

letter      = "A".."Z" | "a".."z" ;
digit       = "0".."9" ;
```

Identifiers and mnemonics are case-insensitive; they are normalized to uppercase internally.

### Concrete Syntax Grammar (BNF / CFG)

The following context-free grammar (CFG), written in BNF, defines the concrete syntax of the SN/X assembly language:

```bnf
<program>           ::= <line>* <eof>

<line>              ::= [<label-def>] [<instruction>] <eol>

<label-def>         ::= <identifier> ":"

<instruction>       ::= <mnemonic> [<operand-list>]

<mnemonic>          ::= <identifier>

<operand-list>      ::= <operand> ("," <operand>)*

<operand>           ::= <register-operand>
                      | <address-operand>
                      | <label-ref-operand>

<register-operand>  ::= REGISTER

<address-operand>   ::= NUMBER "(" REGISTER ")"
                      | NUMBER

<label-ref-operand> ::= <identifier>

<eol>               ::= EOL | <eof>
<eof>               ::= EOF
```

**Notes:**
- When `<address-operand>` is written as just `NUMBER` (without parentheses), the base register defaults to `$0`.
- `<mnemonic>` is matched against the supported opcodes (`ADD`, `AND`, `SUB`, `SLT`, `NOT`, `SR`, `HLT`, `LD`, `ST`, `LDA`, `IN`, `OUT`, `BZ`, `BAL`). Unknown mnemonics produce a diagnostic error.
- Labels and mnemonics are case-insensitive.

### Operand Types by Instruction

| Instruction | Operand 1       | Operand 2                  | Operand 3       |
|-------------|-----------------|----------------------------|-----------------|
| ADD         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| AND         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| SUB         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| SLT         | Register        | Register                   | Register        |
| NOT         | Register        | Register                   |                 |
| SR          | Register        | Register                   |                 |
| HLT         |                 |                            |                 |
| LD          | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| ST          | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| LDA         | Register        | Address                    |                 |
| IN          | Register        |                            |                 |
| OUT         | Register        |                            |                 |
| BZ          | Register        | Label                      |                 |
| BAL         | Register        | Label or Address           |                 |
